README.md, before:

# Sensor Dataset Preprocessing

This repository contains a comprehensive pipeline for preprocessing sensor and weight data, specifically designed for accelerometer and gyroscope binary data and weight from a scale under plate, for use in machine learning models.

## Features

- **Data Loading and Saving**: Efficiently reads and writes sensor data.
- **Preprocessing**: Includes syncing, resampling, median filtering, and gravity component removal from accelerometer data, standardization, optional mirroring for left handed subjects.
- **Inspection and Analysis**: Offers statistical analysis and evaluation tools for quality assurance.
- **Visualization**: Provides utilities for visualizing data trends and anomalies.
- **Variants**: Contains alternative methods for preprocessing steps, allowing for method comparison and selection.

## Directory Structure


- `config/`: Configuration files in JSON format.
- `data/`: Directory for raw and processed data storage.
  - `raw/`: Contains raw data files organized by subject.
    - `1/`, `2/`, `3/`, ...: Folders for each subject, named by a unique identifier.
      - `timestamp_accelerometer.bin`: Raw accelerometer data files, where 'timestamp' is the creation time in Unix time.
      - `timestamp_gyroscope.bin`: Raw gyroscope data files, where 'timestamp' is the creation time in Unix time.
      - `weight_time.txt`: Weight measurements in text format, where 'time' is in the format YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS.
  - `processed/`: Contains processed data files organized by subject.
    - `1/`, `2/`, `3/`, ...: Folders for each subject, named by a unique identifier.
      - `combined_data.parquet`: Processed data in Parquet format.
- `docs/`: Additional documentation, guidelines, and notes.
- `notebooks/`: Jupyter notebooks for demonstrations, experiments, and tutorials.
- `src/`: Source code directory for the dataset preprocessing pipeline.
  - `analysis/`: Scripts for data analysis and generating statistics about subjects and the dataset.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_inspection.py`
    - `dataset_statistics.py`
  - `main/`: Main scripts for dataset creation and preprocessing.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_io.py`
    - `data_preprocessing.py`
  - `utils/`: Utility scripts with helper functions.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_visualization.py`
    - `method_variants.py`
    - `tools.py`
- `.gitignore`: File specifying untracked files that Git should ignore.
- `LICENSE`: The MIT License detailing the terms under which the software is provided.
- `README.md`: This file, providing an overview and documentation for the project.
- `requirements.txt`: List of Python dependencies required to run the project.
- `run_pipeline.py`: Master script to initiate and run the preprocessing pipeline.

## Installation

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yiannislevy/Sensor-Dataset-Preprocessing.git
cd Sensor-Dataset-Preprocessing
```

Install the required dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage

To run the preprocessing pipeline, execute the following command:

```bash
python run_pipeline.py
```
The pipeline will process data in the `data/raw` directory and output the results to `data/processed`.

## Data Folder Structure

The `data` directory should be structured as follows:

- Each subject's data is contained in a separate folder named with a unique ID.
- The subject folder contains raw binary files for accelerometer and gyroscope data. There may be multiple binary files for each sensor, which will be concatenated during processing.
- A text file containing weight data is also included in the subject's folder.
- Processed data will be saved in the `data/processed` directory, within a folder corresponding to the subject's ID, in a Parquet (default) file that contains all processed data for that subject.

## Configuration

Adjust the configuration file `config/config.json` to specify the following parameters:

- `data_dir`: The directory containing the raw data.
- `processed_dir`: The directory to save the processed data.
- `upsample_frequency`: The frequency to upsample the data to, in Hz.
- `median_filter_order`: The order of the median filter to apply to the data.
- `gravity_filter_cutoff_hz`: The cutoff frequency for the low-pass filter used.
- `left_handed_subjects`: A list of subject IDs that are left handed.
- `file_format`: Format of the file to be saved. Can choose between parquet, pickle, csv.

## Documentation

Documentation for the project can be found in the `docs` directory (pending).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Mandometer Time Alignment

Since mandometer does not offer the option to save timestamp data along weight (in grams) we devised a manual way to do so in order to align the weight data with the sensor data, using video recordings. The following steps are required:

1. Find a commonly identifiable event between the video and sensor data.
2. Note the sensor's timestamp.
3. Note the video's timestamp (preferably relative to its start for simplicity).
4. Find a commonly identifiable event between the video and weight data.
5. Note the weight's timestamp relative to its start (1 sample = 1 second, since 1hz)
6. Note the video's timestamp.
7. Calculate the relative difference of sensor and weight events from video timestamps.
8. The mandometer's start time is the sensor's event timestamp (it's our reference) + the relative difference (from 7) - the weight's timestamp (from 5)

Commit message:

Update pipeline structure - Change gravity removal method - Change filterin from median to moving average - Include standard watch orientation alignment - Update the order - Change minor components

README.md, after:

# Sensor Dataset Preprocessing

This repository contains a comprehensive pipeline for preprocessing sensor and weight data, specifically designed for accelerometer and gyroscope binary data and weight from a scale under plate, for use in machine learning models.

## Features

- **Data Loading and Saving**: Efficiently reads and writes sensor data.
- **Preprocessing**: Includes syncing, resampling, moving average filtering, and gravity component removal from accelerometer data, standardization, optional mirroring for left handed subjects, alignment with a microsoft band 2 watch axes orientation standard.
- **Inspection and Analysis**: Offers statistical analysis and evaluation tools for quality assurance.
- **Visualization**: Provides utilities for visualizing data trends and anomalies.
- **Variants**: Contains alternative methods for preprocessing steps, allowing for method comparison and selection.

## Directory Structure


- `config/`: Configuration files in JSON format.
- `data/`: Directory for raw and processed data storage.
  - `raw/`: Contains raw data files organized by subject.
    - `1/`, `2/`, `3/`, ...: Folders for each subject, named by a unique identifier.
      - `timestamp_accelerometer.bin`: Raw accelerometer data files, where 'timestamp' is the creation time in Unix time.
      - `timestamp_gyroscope.bin`: Raw gyroscope data files, where 'timestamp' is the creation time in Unix time.
      - `weight_time.txt`: Weight measurements in text format, where 'time' is in the format YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS.
  - `processed/`: Contains processed data files organized by subject.
    - `1/`, `2/`, `3/`, ...: Folders for each subject, named by a unique identifier.
      - `combined_data.parquet`: Processed data in Parquet format.
- `docs/`: Additional documentation, guidelines, and notes.
- `notebooks/`: Jupyter notebooks for demonstrations, experiments, and tutorials.
- `src/`: Source code directory for the dataset preprocessing pipeline.
  - `analysis/`: Scripts for data analysis and generating statistics about subjects and the dataset.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_inspection.py`
    - `dataset_statistics.py`
  - `main/`: Main scripts for dataset creation and preprocessing.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_io.py`
    - `data_preprocessing.py`
  - `utils/`: Utility scripts with helper functions.
    - `__init__.py`
    - `data_visualization.py`
    - `method_variants.py`
    - `tools.py`
- `.gitignore`: File specifying untracked files that Git should ignore.
- `LICENSE`: The MIT License detailing the terms under which the software is provided.
- `README.md`: This file, providing an overview and documentation for the project.
- `requirements.txt`: List of Python dependencies required to run the project.
- `run_pipeline.py`: Master script to initiate and run the preprocessing pipeline.

## Installation

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/yiannislevy/Sensor-Dataset-Preprocessing.git
cd Sensor-Dataset-Preprocessing
```

Install the required dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Usage

To run the preprocessing pipeline, execute the following command:

```bash
python run_pipeline.py
```
The pipeline will process data in the `data/raw` directory and output the results to `data/processed`.

## Data Folder Structure

The `data` directory should be structured as follows:

- Each subject's data is contained in a separate folder named with a unique ID.
- The subject folder contains raw binary files for accelerometer and gyroscope data. There may be multiple binary files for each sensor, which will be concatenated during processing.
- A text file containing weight data is also included in the subject's folder.
- Processed data will be saved in the `data/processed` directory, within a folder corresponding to the subject's ID, in a Parquet (default) file that contains all processed data for that subject.

## Configuration

Adjust the configuration file `config/config.json` to specify the following parameters:

- `data_dir`: The directory containing the raw data.
- `processed_dir`: The directory to save the processed data.
- `upsample_frequency`: The frequency to upsample the data to, in Hz.
- `moving_average_filter_length`: The length of the moving average filter.
- `gravity_filter_cutoff_hz`: The cutoff frequency for the low-pass filter used.
- `left_handed_subjects`: A list of subject IDs that are left handed.
- `file_format`: Format of the file to be saved. Can choose between parquet, pickle, csv.

## Documentation

Documentation for the project can be found in the `docs` directory (pending).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

## Mandometer Time Alignment

Since mandometer does not offer the option to save timestamp data along weight (in grams) we devised a manual way to do so in order to align the weight data with the sensor data, using video recordings. The following steps are required:

1. Find a commonly identifiable event between the video and sensor data.
2. Note the sensor's timestamp.
3. Note the video's timestamp (preferably relative to its start for simplicity).
4. Find a commonly identifiable event between the video and weight data.
5. Note the weight's timestamp relative to its start (1 sample = 1 second, since 1hz)
6. Note the video's timestamp.
7. Calculate the relative difference of sensor and weight events from video timestamps.
8. The mandometer's start time is the sensor's event timestamp (it's our reference) + the relative difference (from 7) - the weight's timestamp (from 5)
